"The Masters' Scholars Research Program (MSRP) is a voluntary, selective program. Qualifying students will collaborate with Lally faculty or faculty across the Rensselaer campus to realize practical outcomes from research. "

Link to MSRP page : https://lallyschool.rpi.edu/lallyexperience/masters-scholars-research-program

Project Description:

Nitrate – primarily originating from fertilizers, septic systems, and agricultural runoff – is an inorganic compound that can pollute drinking water. When consumed, it causes a variety of serious health complications, including methemoglobinemia, or “blue baby syndrome,” in infants. Various water sources, particularly wells, throughout the USA suffer from nitrate pollution. When the amount of nitrate in a well meets or exceeds a certain tolerance level, the well must be shut down in order to direct efforts to ameliorate the nitrate problem. Sometimes, the problem cannot be resolved and thus the well is abandoned. For agricultural operations in drought-stricken California, this is particularly problematic as farmers must truck in their water when their wells are polluted with nitrate. This is a costly workaround that severely encumbers the local agribusiness economy. This project is aimed at developing biotechnology capable of ameliorating drinking water polluted with nitrate by employing an electrochemical bioreactor, itself utilizing denitrifying bacteria, to bioelectrochemically convert the harmful nitrate into inert atmospheric nitrogen.

The student(s) will be expected to perform various case studies to assess the value and economic impact of utilizing this biotechnology to bring polluted wells back online. Various wells both in New York state and California are impacted by nitrate pollution, so directed market research can be done to assess the economic value of such a biotechnological system in various geographic locations, and to therefore help assess the market size for such an invention. Finally, the student(s) will be expected to help identify local, state, and national funding sources to support product development.
